---
description: Discover how to use rete-scopes-plugin to create a subgraph in your node editor. It enables parent-child relationships between nodes, allowing for grouping of nodes in content of parent node
keywords: scopes,parent-child,subgraph,nested graph
---

# Scopes

::alert
This guide is based on the [Basic](/docs/guides/basic) guide. It is recommended to review it for a comprehensive understanding of this guide.
::

::references
:ref-example{title="Scopes" link="/examples/scopes"}
:ref-guide{title="Arrange nodes" link="/docs/guides/arrange"}
:ref-github{title="Plugin" link="https://github.com/retejs/scopes-plugin"}
::

The `rete-scopes-plugin` plugin provides features for building a node editor with nested nodes, also known as a subgraph. This plugin is categorized as [advanced](/docs/licensing).

This approach involves using nodes as parent elements for other nodes. This enables the movement of a parent node to trigger the movement of all of its child nodes, and the movement of child nodes to adjust the size of their parent nodes. The nesting can extend to more than one level.

## Install dependencies {#install-dependencies}

```bash
npm i rete-scopes-plugin
```

## Prepare nodes {#prepare-nodes}

The plugin requires node sizes to be explicitly specified:

```ts
class Node extends ClassicPreset.Node {
  width = 190;
  height = 120;
  parent?: string
}
class Connection<N extends Node> extends ClassicPreset.Connection<N, N> {}

type Schemes = GetSchemes<Node, Connection<Node>>;
```

The purpose of this is to enable dynamic resizing of the node's sizes if it has nested nodes.

Additionally, it's suggested to specify an optional `parent` field to programmatically designate parent nodes.

## Plugin connection {#connect-plugin}

```ts
import { ScopesPlugin, Presets as ScopesPresets } from 'rete-scopes-plugin'

const scopes = new ScopesPlugin<Schemes>()

scopes.addPreset(ScopesPresets.classic.setup())

area.use(scopes)
```

This code relies on a classic preset that offers functionality for user-scope interactions. To select a node and assign it as a parent, the user may long-press the node and drag it over another node.

## Adding nodes {#add-nodes}

Let's add a couple of nodes, with one serving as a parent:

```ts
const node1 = new Node('A');
const parent1 = new Node('Parent');

node1.parent = parent1.id; // specify node1 as nested into parent1

await editor.addNode(parent1); // make sure to add the parent node before adding its child
await editor.addNode(node1);
```

## Nodes order {#nodes-order}

Bu default, the plugin is set up to use its own node ordering. If you followed the [Basic](/docs/guides/basic) guide, you need to remove `AreaExtensions.simpleNodesOrder`

```ts
AreaExtensions.simpleNodesOrder(area);
```

The ordering of nested nodes is a bit different as parent nodes shouldn't overlap its child nodes. When bringing node to front or adding child nodes to it, the order of child nodes is adapted (by `reordered` event)

## Arrange nodes {#arrange-nodes}

The same [Arrange nodes](/docs/guides/arrange) guide can be used for automated positioning of nodes in relation to one another, as the plugin used within also supports nested nodes.

## Dynamically changing relationships

After the nodes have been added to the editor, to change the bindings between nodes, in addition to changing `node.parent` you need to explicitly call the update method

```ts
// previously parent1.id was assigned
node1.parent = undefined;
await scopes.update(parent1.id)
```

## Change the parent node padding {#change-padding}

By default, all nodes have the same padding. You can find these values in [the API documentation](/docs/api/rete-scopes-plugin#props). The padding can be customized for each node individually using the `padding` option.

```ts
const scopes = new ScopesPlugin<Schemes>({
  padding: nodeId => ({ top: 40, left: 20, right: 20, bottom: 20 })
});
```
## Excluding nodes {#exclude-nodes}

The `exclude` option allows you to exclude specific nodes from being processed by the plugin. This can be useful when you want certain nodes not to affect the size of the parent node.

```ts
const scopes = new ScopesPlugin<Schemes>({
  exclude: nodeId => excludedNodes.includes(nodeId)
});
```

## Changing parent node size {#parent-size}

The generated sizes of parent nodes can be customized for specific nodes using the `size` option. This functionality is useful, for example, when child nodes have been removed, and you need to set a new size to display the layout correctly.

```ts
const scopes = new ScopesPlugin<Schemes>({
  size: (nodeId, size) => ({ width: size.width, height: 100 })
});
```


Check out the complete result on the [Scopes](/examples/scopes) example page.
