# Development

This documentation article is for developers who are looking to develop new plugins, improve existing ones, or debug them.

## Rete CLI {#rete-cli}

Rete CLI is a building tool with built-in support for TypeScript and ESLint along with predefined rules. Additionally, it includes Jest. These features make it simple to start building new plugins without having to setup your own environment for building, linting, and testing.

The build feature is based on Rollup and comes with pre-configured Babel presets for TypeScript support.

### Installation {#install-rete-cli}

```bash
npm i -g rete-cli@next
```
### Building the project {#build-rete-cli}

The first step is to create a configuration file called `rete.config.ts`
```ts
import { ReteOptions } from 'rete-cli'

export default<ReteOptions>{
  input: 'src/index.ts', // path to entry script
  name: 'Namespace' // namespace for UMD bundles
}
```

Run the command

```bash
rete build --config rete.config.ts
```

The generated `dist` directory is publish-ready and includes all required bundles, type definitions, README.md, and package.json files with their corresponding paths.

The `--watch` option can be used to trigger automatic project building upon save, while the `--outputs` option allows you to specify multiple output paths separated by commas for the build destination.

### Create an advanced configuration {#create-config-rete-cli}

Let's take a look at several configuration options that are supported:

- connect Rollup plugins
- specify third-party dependencies that shouldn't be bundled
- specify output path
- connect Babel plugins and presets

```ts
import { ReteOptions } from 'rete-cli'

export default <ReteOptions>[ // config with multiple entries
  {
    input: 'src/foo/index.ts',
    name: 'Namespace'
    babel: {
      presets: [
        require('@babel/preset-env'), // used by default, but should be declared when you specifies 'presets'
        require('@babel/preset-typescript'), // used by default
        require('@babel/preset-react'),
      ]
    }
  },
  {
    input: 'src/bar/index.ts',
    name: 'Namespace'
    globals: {
      'rete': 'Rete',
    },
    plugins: [ // specify Rollup plugins
      commonjs(),
    ],
    babel: {
      plugins: [
        // include Babel plugins
      ]
    }
  }
]
```

### Linting {#lint-rete-cli}

By default, running `rete build` command includes a linting step prior to generating the bundles. However, you can also perform linting independently by running a separate command.

```bash
rete lint
```

## Rete Kit {#rete-kit}

The purpose of this tool is to improve efficiency when developing plugins or projects using this framework.

It offers the following features:

- **Plugin creating**: use this feature to create a basic plugin structure instantly, without the need for setting up a build system, linter, or test runner
- **Application creation**: choose the framework to build your application, specify the version and desired features and get a ready-to-use application to jumpstart your development process
- **Batch build**: select copies of repositories containing the source code of the plugins being developed and this tool will start building them in a watch mode, as well as synchronizing their dependencies

### Install {#install-rete-kit}

```bash
npm i -g rete-kit@next
```

### Create an application {#create-app-rete-kit}

Inquirer mode

```bash
rete-kit app --next
```

Or, you can specify the options

```bash
rete-kit app --next --name <name> --stack <stack> --stack-version <version> --features <features> --deps-alias <deps-alias>
```

where
- `<stack>` option lets you choose between `angular`, `vue`, `vue-vite`, or `react`
- `<features>` is a comma-separated list of the Rete.js editor features
- `<deps-alias>` is a JSON file that maps dependencies. By default, it installs the latest version from npmjs, but you can specify a different version using the format `name@version` or a path to the tarball

### Plugin creation {#create-plugin-rete-kit}

You can easily create a plugin within your codebase by following the example of other plugins and extending `Scope`, without the need to build it as a separate package.

In case you want to develop a plugin as a separate package, use this command:

```bash
rete-kit plugin --name <plugin name>
```

where `<plugin name>` is a string that will be transformed into different formats and used in the templates, such as `rete.config.ts` and the `package.json` name.

The generated plugin includes all the essential configs, allowing you to start working with the source code immediately.

### Building dependencies for development {#build-deps-rete-kit}

Developing modules that are separated into different packages is a challenging process. In contrast to a single codebase where the build system can detect changes in the directory and apply hot reload, developers need to manually set up the build of each dependency they work on and insert the changes into the project.

Basically, `npm link` and a bash scripts can be used to build required modules in watch mode. However, `npm link` has certain limitations that might not be immediately noticeable. These limitations can stem from the shared dependencies of the project and the dependencies we're working on.

The `rete-kit build` command was created to address such issues. It has two modes:

- **building all project dependencies**: specify your project's path. The tool scans the current directory recursively (up to two levels deep) for repositories that contain the `rete` dependency. In the watch mode, it directly builds them into the `node_modules` directory where they are used

```bash
rete-kit build --for ./my-project
```

- **performing a build of specific directories**: specify the directories containing the source code for dependencies that should be included during the build process using `--folders` option. Similar to the first mode, the resulting build will be inserted into the `node_modules` directory of the target

```bash
rete-kit build --folders my-plugin-1,my-plugin-1,my-project
```

Please note that to use the hot reload feature to its fullest, you will need to disable the cache for the relevant dependencies. Otherwise, any changes made will not be applied on the fly. To accomplish this in Webpack, you can specify `snapshot.managedPaths`. If the project still doesn't update, it may be necessary to manually clear the cache of compiled modules.

## Style guide {#style-guide}

ESLint is used to ensure code style consistency across all packages. The configuration is provided by [Rete CLI](#rete-cli) and comprises rules that are deemed more suitable by the maintainers. If necessary, you can customize the configuration by adding required rules

Although linters are helpful, there are some cases they may miss. To supplement this, we have included a list of recommendations:

- **Use comment with purpose**: prioritize refactoring your code to be more clear and concise before relying on comments to explain it
- **Simplicity**: strive for a balance between code reuse and the amount of boilerplate code. While boilerplate code may seem redundant, it is often more appropriate than overly complicated solutions that can obscure the code's purpose
- **Handling errors and exceptions**: always handle errors and exceptions properly, providing users with useful information about the issue. Ensure that any exceptions thrown do not hinder the application's performance and are gracefully handled whenever possible
- **Performance**: the code should be optimized to ensure there are no significant freezes with large data sets, but it's equally important to maintain code readability and ease of maintenance rather than focusing solely on micro-optimizations
